A Bilateral Labor Market: Salary Determinants 

of National Football League Quarterbacks 

by 
Eric J. Martin 


Thesis submitted to the Faculty of the 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University 
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of 


MASTER OF ARTS 
IN 
ECONOMICS 


APPROVED:


 Roger N. Waud, Chair Nancy A. Wentzler


 Thomas Lutton Brian K. Reid 

February 12, 1999 

Blacksburg, Virginia 

Keywords: Salary determinants, Labor markets, Professional sports, Bilateral oligopoly 


A Bilateral Labor Market: Salary Determinants 
of National Football League Quarterbacks 

by 
Eric J. Martin 


ABSTRACT 

In general, an individual commands a salary in return for their contribution 
to the production process at their place of employment. In the case of a 
quarterback for a National Football League team, the salary he commands 
depends on how much the team¡¯s owner expects him to contribute to the team 
and how unique his talents and services are. The salary of the quarterback is 
negotiated between the quarterback and the team and will vary greatly 
depending on the relative strengths of each side's bargaining position. The 
bilateral oligopoly provides a useful way to view how salaries are 
determined. This thesis uses an econometric model to explore the bilateral 
oligopoly framework for determining quarterback salaries. Within this 
framework, there are a set of on-field performance variables (related to the 
quarterback and the team) and off-field financial variables (related to the 
team) that are used to negotiate a quarterback¡¯s salary. This paper 
characterizes the quarterback-team relationship by identifying those variables 
that effect quarterback salaries. 


Table of Contents 

Section Page 

I. INTRODUCTION 1 

II. MOTIVATING THE MODEL 6 

III. BILATERAL LABOR MARKETS 15 

IV. PARAMETERS OF THE STUDY 21 

V. EMPIRICAL RESULTS 27 

VI. CONCLUSIONS 29 

References 31 

Appendix: Data Set and Sources 33 

VITA 38 

iii 


Section I: 
INTRODUCTION 


The market for quarterback services in the National Football League (NFL) is 
imperfect. The current framework for salary negotiations between a quarterback and the 
owner of an NFL team suggests a bilateral oligopoly market situation. There exists an 
upstream oligopolist (the quarterback) that is selling its output to a single downstream 
oligopsonist buyer (the team owner) that may also be an oligopolist in its output market.1 
As a result of this framework, some quarterbacks are paid extremely high salaries while 
others are paid far less. Is it simply a difference in their perceived talent or is there 
something else? By developing an econometric model to explore these negotiations, this 
study seeks to identify what factors impact a quarterback¡¯s salary. 

The following paragraphs provide a summary of the work done previously on this 
topic and how those early efforts influenced this study. Next, the approach taken by this 
study is outlined and how it differs from earlier work is discussed. Finally, a theoretical 
look at the model is provided and accompanied by a discussion on several key issues 
considered during the development of the model. 

The "Pay for Performance" Area of Study 

The identification and analysis of salary determinants in professional team sports 
is a relatively young field of study with most of the work coming in the last two decades. 
Early work focused on identifying the performance variables that impact average team 
salaries while more recent studies have attempted to identify salary determinants for an 
individual player position in a team sport (i.e., a pitcher in baseball or a quarterback in 
football). Some of the seminal studies in this area, referred to by many as "pay for 
performance", were conducted by Gerald Scully (1974), Gary Neil Ross (1975), Marshall 

1 Ferguson and Gould, page 288 

1 



2 


Medoff (1976), and James Hill and William Spellman (1983). These early studies 
concentrated primarily on professional baseball since, by its nature, baseball provides 
distinct and measurable performance variables for the individual player. These include 
batting average, home runs and runs batted in for measuring a hitter¡¯s performance, and 
strike-outs and earned run average for measuring the performance of a pitcher. 

"Pay for performance" studies did expand to encompass other professional team 
sports such as football and hockey. However, the structure of these sports does not allow 
for the easy identification of performance variables for an individual player position. 
Under this constraint, much of the early work in football "pay for performance" by 
economists such as Mogull (1975) and Scahill (1985) focused on linking salaries to nonperformance 
variables including a player¡¯s draft round, the number of games played (as a 
proxy for experience) and their race. Other studies aimed to link team and average 
salaries to the overall success of the team, as measured by wins and championships. 

Much of the work completed to date focuses solely on player-side variables with 
econometric models being developed to regress salaries against certain on-field player 
performance variables. In only a few instances have team-oriented variables such as 
revenue, monopoly power, etc. been included in the analysis. Studies that have 
incorporated team-owner variables have been limited primarily to baseball and hockey. 
No football-related studies using this approach were identified. 

Approach to this Study 

In contrast to the work summarized above, this study takes the more traditional 
approach of regressing salaries against player performance variables one step further by 
introducing a bilateral labor market framework to the salary negotiations of NFL 
quarterbacks. In this context, a set of team owner-related variables has been identified 
and incorporated into the salary determination model. The assumption here is that a 


3 


quarterback¡¯s salary is not determined solely by his on-field performance. Instead, those 
on-field variables are used in conjunction with team-related variables to negotiate a 
quarterback¡¯s salary. 

Unlike a competitive labor market, a bilateral labor market yields no precise 
solution. Each party (the quarterback and the team owner) uses the results of certain 
individual and team performance and financial variables to establish a price range within 
which they will negotiate. Depending on the relative strength of each side¡¯s bargaining 
power, the final salary will fall somewhere within the established price range. 

In this study, the average annual salary for an NFL quarterback is regressed 
against a combination of player and team variables in an attempt to identify which 
variables impact quarterback salaries. The variables selected have largely been drawn 
from existing studies, mostly for the quarterback variables. As noted, football-related 
studies that provide insights into team variables were not available. However, team-
related variables such as team revenue, payroll costs and winning percentage were 
identified in several non-football studies and applied to this effort. Hopefully, the 
approach taken in this study will contribute to the overall body of "pay for performance" 
literature and, in particular, to the study of salary determination in the NFL. 

The Theoretical Model 

In examining this issue, the inherent challenge became "How to identify the 
variables that impact an individual player¡¯s salary in a team sport"? In football, it is quite 
possible that this could only be accomplished for the quarterback position. For certain 
positions, it would be virtually impossible to measure individual performance. For 
example, offensive linemen are paid to create openings for running backs to run through 
and to provide time for the quarterback to complete passes to receivers. However, one 
could not separate out the impact one lineman has on team performance without 


4 


considering his teammates on the offensive line since their every step is so closely 
coordinated. In contract negotiations for a lineman, an emphasis would be placed on 
subjective evaluations of the player¡¯s productivity and not on quantifiable performance 
measures. This would likely hold true for other positions on the team including defensive 
lineman and linebackers. Although some quantifiable performance variables may exist 
(e.g., tackles and quarterback sacks), individual productivity would not be easily 
measured. For instance, a defensive lineman who is consistently double-teamed, may 
have fewer tackles than one of his teammates. However, because of the double-teaming, 
he has freed up his teammates to make more tackles. As a result, his total contribution to 
the team¡¯s success may not come from tackles and sacks, but through his ability to 
disrupt the opponent¡¯s offense. Measuring that contribution would then take on a more 
qualitative or subjective approach. 

With this in mind, this study attempts to explore the performance of the 
quarterback and, in conjunction with certain team performance and financial variables, 
analyze their relative impact on the price of a quarterback. As the study progresses, the 
reader should be prepared to accept two key tenets. First, as a leader in a team sport, the 
quarterback frequently gets more than his share of the blame for an unproductive offense. 
Conversely, he most certainly receives more than his share of credit for a productive 
offense. This is likely due to the perception that he has a certain level of control over 
each play and, subsequently, over the outcome of each play. Although the modern-day 
quarterback rarely calls his own plays, he does have the option of changing the play at the 
line of scrimmage if he sees a defensive scheme that he does not like. Further, each play 
starts in his hand and his decisions largely affect the play's outcome. 

Secondly, it must be remembered that while this study attempts to isolate 
individual impacts, it is still a team game. Regardless of how good the quarterback is, his 
production will suffer if he is surrounded by inferior talent. Conversely, the performance 
of a mediocre quarterback may be elevated by superior production from his teammates. 


5 


As such, what might appear to be a potentially important performance variable on the 
surface may not be as closely correlated as one might suspect. A quarterback is not going 
to win games by himself, regardless of how talented he is. 

From a team perspective, certain financial and on-field performance variables 
must be considered when deciding to sign a contract with a quarterback. Player payroll, 
team revenue, and franchise value would certainly present themselves as potentially 
important elements that would impact a team¡¯s salary decisions. For example, a team 
that has a traditionally low payroll may be willing to bypass a certain quarterback in favor 
of one that might fit into a price range they are comfortable with. In doing so, they will 
have foregone a certain increment of talent in exchange for retaining some of their labor 
funds. 

Based on these interactions, the following theoretical model has been developed 
using a reduced form equation approach. The equation is characterized by several on-
field quarterback performance variables and by several team-related on-field performance 
variables and off-field financial variables. The equation is as follows: 

Ssal = (Q1, Q2,.....Qn, T1, T2, .....Tn), where 

= the average annual salary of the quarterback

Ssal 

Q1..Qn = some combination of on-field quarterback performance variables 
T1..Tn = some combination of on-field football performance variables and off-field 
financial variables 

To move this analysis forward, empirical salary data from 32 NFL quarterback 
signings have been applied to the theoretical model described above. The remaining 
sections introduce some of the literature that influenced this study, provide a detailed 
look at each of the model¡¯s equations, variables and expected signs, and examine the 
model¡¯s empirical results and accompanying conclusions. 


Section II 
MOTIVATING THE MODEL 


This section introduces several of the more influential studies and identifies 
methodologies, approaches, and performance variables that were applied to this study. A 
summation of the contributions from those studies is provided along with a discussion on 
the key differences between those prior efforts and this study. Finally, the empirical 
model will be introduced and its equations and variables specified. 

Influential Studies 

While there is a growing body of work in the area of "pay for performance" in 
team sports, a large majority focuses on team performance results and average salaries. 
Less has been done on an individual position basis. In Scoville (1974), average NFL 
team salaries for 1970 were regressed on team winning percentage for the previous three 
years. To level the field, dummy variables were used for expansion franchises (which 
were far weaker than the other teams in the league) and the Green Bay Packers (by far the 
most dominant team in the league at that time). After running the model, Scoville 
determined that the most important factor impacting team salaries was their winning 
percentage. This implied that team owners rewarded their players for successful team 
performance. In response to this study, Scahill (1985) attempted to determine the 
marginal revenue product of individual players in a team sport. Faced with the difficulty 
of quantifying a player's contribution to team success (especially those players on the 
offensive and defensive lines), Scahill developed a number of proxies for individual 
performance and inserted them into two regression models. These included the number 
of games played as a proxy for the player's experience; the position the player was drafted 
as a proxy for their potential; and, the number of all-pro teams selected to as a measure of 
the player's stature among his peers. 

Average team salaries were then regressed on the average number of games 

6 



7 


played by the team's players, the average round in which they were drafted, the average 
number of all-pro teams they had been selected to, and on team winning percentage (for 
the last five years and the last ten years). Although the results of the two runs indicated 
the correlation between average salary and winning percentage was positive, in neither 
regression was the winning percentage statistically significant when included with the 
other independent variables. Of the variables included, only the number of all-pro teams 
was statistically significant. As a result, Scahill suggested that team performance plays a 
lesser role in determining player salaries. 

While Scahill's study focuses on average team salaries, it is possible that the 
quarterback may be viewed as having the most direct impact and, therefore, the largest 
responsibility for winning and losing games than any other single position. In this sense, 
the quarterback assumes the role of a manager and must be willing to accept a larger 
share of the blame when the offense (and subsequently, the team) is unproductive while 
garnering a larger share of the credit when the offense is productive. 

Perhaps the most influential study was Jones and Walsh (1988). In this study, the 
authors set up a regression model relating individual player salaries to skill attributes, a 
measure of discrimination, and the monopoly and monopsony characteristics of National 
Hockey League (NHL) franchises. Their major conclusions were that skills (on-ice 
performance) are the principal salary determinant for players at all positions, monopoly 
characteristics of franchises have a positive impact on the forward position, and the only 
position that may incur some salary discrimination is the defensemen. These results 
support the standard view of neoclassical price theory, which puts forth that in the 
absence of discrimination, skill differences are the prime determinant of salary 
differentials. 

Of particular interest from this study was the methodology used by the authors in 
developing a position-specific model and testing it against empirical salary data. Jones 


8 


and Walsh included a number of on-ice performance variables and off-ice variables in 
their model and ran it against salary data from over 300 players. Particularly interesting 
was that a number of variables looked at the player's career performance (e.g., number of 
points scored per game, number of goals allowed per game, etc.), the round in which they 
were drafted and the number of NHL games they had played. These last two variables 
provide insights into the team's expectation of a player's future performance and some 
measure of how "intelligently" he plays the game. 

A second, very influential study was Ahlburg and Dworkin (1991). They sought 
to identify which factors determined salaries in the NFL. At the time, there was much 
disagreement over which variables actually determined player salaries. Players 
contended that salaries where determined by a player¡¯s years of experience, their position 
and draft round. They did not believe that performance impacted their salaries as much 
as it should. Team owners, on the other hand, insisted that on-field performance was the 
principal factor in determining player compensation. 

To study the situation, the authors developed a model focusing on salary 
determinants and ran it using salary data from 1982, 1986 and 1987. Since player 
positions in football are filled by "specialists", the authors developed a set of position-
specific performance measures to use in the model. Using principal factor analysis, a set 
of 21 performance measures were developed for the quarterback position. This set 
included both career and previous-year measures. After completing the model runs, it 
became apparent that both sides were at least partially right. Draft round and seniority 
continued to be a factor (as contended by the players) while at the same time, 
performance differences clearly and significantly impacted salaries across all positions. 
Two elements of Ahlburg/Dworkin were applied directly to this study. First, salary 
determinants were identified as being both on-field performance variables and off-field 
non-performance variables such as draft round and years of experience. Second, a 
quarterback¡¯s on-field performance was looked at using both career and previous-year 


9 


statistics. 

Additional works that were used in developing this study¡¯s methodological 
approach include Kahn (1991) and Scully (1974). Kahn's methodology called for 
developing a number of performance variables including whether the player was named 
to the Pro Bowl, how many games he had played (as a proxy for experience), 
demographic characteristics of the city he played in and his race. He then regressed the 
player's average annual compensation against those variables. 

Scully¡¯s model posits: 1) a team¡¯s winning percentage in baseball is determined 
by batting and pitching performance; and, 2) that overall team revenues are determined 
by team winning percentage. His model may then be used to estimate indirectly how an 
individual player¡¯s performance effects the team¡¯s winning percentage, the team¡¯s 
revenue, and subsequently, the player¡¯s value as measured by his marginal revenue 
product. 

Contributions to this Study 

As indicated, a number of the studies reviewed contributed in various ways to the 
development of this study. Jones and Walsh (1983) provided an overall methodology to 
identifying salary determinants of individual players in a team sport. The authors 
regressed player salaries against a number of player performance variables and franchise 
characteristics. In essence, this was the approach that was used in developing the 
bilateral model that is the subject of this study. 

Ahlburg and Dworkin (1991) identified a number of quarterback variables that 
were also used in this study. In addition, the authors introduced two key considerations 
behind the selection of the variables. First, salary determinants in the NFL are largely a 
combination of on-field variables (performance) and off-field variables (non



10 


performance). In their study, however, off-field variables included only player-related 
variables. It does not address any team-related variables. Secondly, quarterback 
variables were used that focused on their performance during the most recent season and 
their performance over the course of their career. 

It should be noted that several non-football studies including Scully (1974), 
Medoff (1976), and Sommers and Quinton (1982) incorporated team-related variables 
such as team winning percentage and team revenue. While these variables were also 
applied to this study, the intent of these authors was to look back to prior seasons and 
determine the marginal revenue product of an individual player. The approach used in 
this study differed slightly in that team revenue and wins were identified as factors that 
impact salary negotiations from the team¡¯s perspective. That is, their success in these two 
areas will help dictate the amount of money they are willing to spend to acquire a 
quarterback. What has been emphasized in this approach is that a quarterback¡¯s salary 
will reflect his expected contribution towards winning games and championships. 
Empirical results from the three studies listed above, as well as Scott, et al (1983), 
indicate a strong correlation between a team¡¯s winning percentage and their total revenue. 
This would lead a team owner to sign a quarterback that the owner believes can help his 
team win games and, subsequently, increase team revenues. 

While this study has drawn from the approaches of earlier studies, it has expanded 
beyond those mentioned by applying a bilateral market framework to the NFL. That is, 
individual player variables and team-related variables have been included in the model. 
This has been done primarily to capture performance and non-performance factors that 
may impact negotiations from both the quarterback¡¯s side as well as the team¡¯s side. 
Although this has been attempted in other team sports, notably hockey and baseball, this 
study appears to be breaking new ground in the analysis of NFL quarterback salaries. 

At this point, it will be useful to introduce the model developed for this study and 


11 


define its equations and variables. Hopefully, it is clear to the reader how the model 
makes use of some of the approaches and variables identified above and how it differs 
from previous studies. 

Specification of the Bilateral Model 

The focus of this study has been on the interdependence between the quarterback 
variables and the team variables, and whether the quarterback and the team can come to 
an agreement on salary as their situations vary. This has led to the development of a 
simultaneous equation model consisting of three equations that encompass the joint 
determination of several variables. Once the first two equations are estimated, the 
resulting fitted values are entered into the third equation, which is then estimated. The 
third equation is the principal equation in this model. 

Using the fitted values from Equations 1 and 2 as variables in Equation 3 captures 
the quarterback¡¯s expected rather than actual level of performance. Holding the other 
variables constant, these expectations may be used to project future levels of performance 
as input to the salary negotiation process. 

A simultaneous equation system has been used since the nonstochastic nature of 
the relationship between explanatory variables and the error term would otherwise violate 
an assumption necessary for using ordinary least squares. That is, explanatory variables 
must be independent of the error term for consistent estimation. Since the model is in 
reduced form, only predetermined exogenous and lagged endogenous variables appear on 
the right side of the equation and are assumed to be independent of the error term. This 
method allows the use of ordinary least squares for each separate equation. 

The equations of the model are as follows: 

Equation 1: Provides insight into the expected success (number of completions) and 
experience (years in NFL) that a quarterback would bring to a team. 


12 


Cj=f(Aj, Bj) + ej, where 

C= number of passes completed during previous season 
A= number of passes attempted during previous season 
B= number of years quarterback has been in the NFL 
ej= the error term 

The expected signs for both variables are positive. That is, as the number of 
attempts and the number of years experience increases, the number of passes completed 
will increase. The fitted value for completions is used as an explanatory variable in the 
principal equation (#3). 

Equation 2: Provides further information on the successes (yards, touchdowns and 
completion percentage) and failures (interceptions) that a quarterback would be expected 
to bring to the team that signs him. 

Rk=fR(Dk, Tk, Ik, Ok) +ek, where 

R= the quarterback¡¯s rating for the previous year (a quarterback rating is a performance 
measure derived from the number of passes completed, yards gained, touchdowns thrown 
and inceptions thrown per pass attempt) 
D= the quarterback¡¯s yards per completion from the previous year 
T= the number of touchdowns the quarterback threw the previous year 
I= the number of interceptions the quarterback threw the previous year 
O= the completion percentage of the quarterback for the previous year 
ek= the error term 

The expected sign for each of the variables, except for interceptions (I), is 
positive. That is, the higher a quarterback¡¯s yards per completion, touchdown passes and 
completion rate is, the higher his rating will be. Conversely, the more interceptions a 
quarterback throws, the lower his rating will be. The fitted value for quarterback rating is 
used as an explanatory variable in Equation 3. 

Equation 3: Establishes a correlation between a quarterback¡¯s salary and his 
performance on the field (completions, career won-loss, rating, pro bowl selection, and 
championships) and some measures (total team revenue, player costs and team wins) of 
the team that signs him. 

Sl=fS(Xl, Yl, Zl , Cl, , Ll , Rl , Fl , Gl) + el , where 


13 


S= average annual salary of the quarterback 
X= total team revenue 
Y= annual player costs of the signing team (captures talent level of team) 
Z= the number of wins the signing team had the previous year 
C= an expectation of the quarterback¡¯s pass completions as a result of his completions 
during the previous season (fitted value from Equation 1) 
L= the career win-loss percentage of the quarterback 
R= an expectation of the quarterback¡¯s rating as a result of his rating from the previous 
season (fitted value from Equation 2) 
F= whether the quarterback was selected to the Pro Bowl following the previous season 
(peer recognition) 
G= whether the quarterback¡¯s previous team won the NFL championship (measure of 
success) 
el= the error term 

The expected signs for all of the variables, except the number of wins (Z) the 
signing team had the previous year, are positive. As the value of each variable increases, 
the expected salary increases. With respect to team revenue and player costs, it appears 
as though a team with higher revenues and a history of higher player costs is more willing 
to pay a higher salary to attract the quarterback they covet. For number of wins by 
signing team, it is possible a team with fewer wins may be more likely to pay a higher 
salary to attract a quarterback that may help them to increase their number of wins and, 
ultimately, their on-field success. However, the sign of this variable is ambiguous. 

The number of pass completions the quarterback had the previous season has been 
included in the model as a measure of his effectiveness, his decisionmaking, his 
experience and his ability to move the team via the pass. More pass completions 
generally lead to more yardage gained, points scored and team victories. His career win-
loss percentage provides a past history of his ability to lead and/or contribute to team 
victories. This captures the notion that a quarterback is a proven "winner" and carries 
with it additional information about the quarterback¡¯s leadership abilities. The 
quarterback¡¯s rating from the previous year captures additional on-field performance 
measures including touchdowns, interceptions and yards per completion. Each of these 
helps establish the quarterback¡¯s ability to protect and advance the football, which is the 


14 


primary objective of the offensive unit. While completions alone may shed light on the 
quarterback¡¯s throwing abilities and decisionmaking, the yards per completion indicates 
an ability to advance the ball. 

Additionally, from a quarterback¡¯s perspective, the championship and pro bowl 
selection variables provide insight into the end result (success) of his season. In a team 
game, the objective is to win games and, ultimately, the championship. As such, winning 
games is the output of the team¡¯s production function. Based on a review of average 
salaries, starting quarterbacks have the highest average salary of any position. This 
suggests that owners, in general, view quarterbacks as the most instrumental piece of the 
team¡¯s production function. By virtue of winning a championship, the quarterback has 
shown that he is capable of leading and/or contributing to accomplishing a team¡¯s 
ultimate goal. In being named to the pro bowl, he has been selected by his peers (and 
coaching staffs) as one of the best in the game for that season. This is particularly 
important since no one knows the game and the factors that influence games like the 
players and coaches. 

With respect to player costs, this variable serves as a constraint to the team¡¯s 
production function. Team¡¯s that have high payrolls may have higher willingness to pay 
for talent than team¡¯s with lower player costs, thus attracting more talented players on 
average. However, high costs may also prevent them from paying premium salaries in 
some cases. The number of wins that the signing team had the previous year is used to 
define the potential that the team has with respect to winning games. A team with few 
wins may not be willing to pay a premium quarterback salary until they acquire/develop 
talent in other areas. Conversely, a team with potential for a successful season or that is 
interested in signing a certain quarterback to use as a foundation in the building process, 
may agree to a premium salary for the quarterback they want. 


Section III: 
BILATERAL LABOR MARKETS 


At this point, it may prove useful to step back and take a look at some of the 
characteristics of a bilateral oligopoly market. This section provides an overview of the 
bilateral market and contrasts it with a competitive labor market. The bilateral 
framework is then applied to the market for NFL quarterbacks. Finally, several 
underlying market assumptions that were included in this study are discussed. 

A Bilateral Oligopoly Market 

In a competitive labor market, there are many buyers and many sellers, none of 
whom are large enough to have any appreciable influence on wages. Each of the sellers in 
this market produces the same product and prices it to maximize profits. The primary 
difference between a competitive market and a bilateral is that the competitive market 
generates substantial amounts of price and quantity-demanded information to its buyers 
and sellers. The market is able to achieve equilibrium, thus enabling market participants 
to develop supply and demand curves. However, due to an insufficient level of 
information rising from the inability to develop supply schedules, the market structure in 
a bilateral oligopoly does not yield a single equilibrium price or quantity.2 

In further exploring a bilateral oligopoly market¡¯s inability to generate supply 
schedules, a supply schedule may be defined as a set of prices and the quantities that 
would be supplied at each price. For the oligopolist seller in this market, any number of 
prices may be associated with a given level of output depending upon the position of 
demand at the output level.3 That is, an infinite number of prices can be associated with 
one level of output. Under these circumstances, market participants will establish a 
theoretical bounds within which price and quantity will range instead of looking for a 

2 Maurice and Phillips, page 524

3

 Baumol and Blinder, 472-3 

15 



16 


precise market solution. The final result will then depend on the bargaining positions, 
skill and preparation of the negotiating parties.4 

Economic theory provides a basis for analyzing the market for a commodity. It 
articulates a possible equilibrium in demand, supply, production, derived demand, profits 
and costs. Consumers maximizing their utility subject to budget constraints choose to 
purchase quantities of goods at prevailing prices. Producers use their production 
processes, wholesale, and retail and marketing activities to produce and supply quantities 
of goods by combining inputs in such a fashion to optimize an objective function. 
Professional football is essentially an entertainment product. Team owners supply the 
market with a team franchise that in a limited sense, may satisfy the consumers demand 
for entertainment and team performance. Football players are an essential input to the 
"production" or supply of the product. The team owner has a "derived demand" for all 
team members, including the quarterback. Owners hire quarterbacks and other players 
and combine their talents with that of the coach to supply consumers a "team." At the 
time the salaries are negotiated, the quarterbacks and the owners may have an 
"expectation" that the team will perform sufficiently well to "supply the fans" with a good 
team, hopefully one that will win enough games, qualify for the play-offs and, ultimately, 
win the NFL championship. The demand for a quarterback then is a "derived demand" it 
is derived with a production function and an objective function clearly in mind. 
However, this industry is not perfectly competitive. At best it is oligopolistic and, as 
such, the "existence" of upward sloping supply curves and downward sloping derived 
demand curves come into question. 

As Applied to the NFL Quarterback Market 

As opposed to a truly competitive market, the labor market for NFL quarterbacks 
more closely resembles a bilateral oligopoly. That is, we see the quarterback operating 

4 Maurice and Phillips, page 524 


17 


under oligopolistic competition principles as a oligopoly seller of his services while the 
team owner acts as a oligopsonist buyer. By definition, oligopolistic competition exists 
when there are relatively few sellers in a market, each of whom sell a slightly different 
product. This is the case with the market for NFL quarterbacks where, at any given time, 
there are three to four dozens individuals who have the requisite college or NFL 
experience to be considered. Each of these individuals is selling a product, himself, that 
is slightly different from the product sold by others in the market. Some of the 
differences might include size of the player, arm strength, years of experience, etc. 

The compelling condition of oligopolistic competition is the concept that 
competing products, namely quarterbacks, are not identical. As such, it is reasonable to 
expect that prices will differ. In selling his services, each quarterback deals with a market 
that is slightly distinct from his competitors. Each quarterback sets a price range that is 
also distinct from his competitors. For instance, Quarterback A may be approaching the 
prime years of his career and has led his teams into post-season play the last couple of 
years. Along the way, he has garnered a number of individual awards and proven himself 
to be an upper echelon quarterback. In setting a price range for his services, his target 
customers may be a select few teams that can offer him the right combination of a high 
salary, talented teammates, and championship possibilities. Conversely, Quarterback B is 
past his prime and, although he is still a competent performer, his skills are beginning to 
deteriorate. His target customers may be a different group of teams that are looking for 
an experienced player to serve as a back-up to a younger player. In any case, his market 
is different from Quarterback A¡¯s as his price range is lower. In both cases, as each 
quarterback¡¯s price gets higher, fewer teams are in the market for his services. In this 
situation, it is possible for the quarterback to price himself too high and find out there are 
no buyers at that price. 

While the negotiations that take place are between a single seller and a single 
buyer, the actions of other sellers and buyers are likely given some weight during 


18 


negotiations. Prices that have been set by earlier agreements between other quarterbacks 
and teams are often used to place bounds on a price range. This information provides 
both parties with sort of a reality test on the quarterback¡¯s price demands and the 
potential for a team to meet or come close enough to the price to initiate talks. While a 
"hot" quarterback may concurrently entertain offers from several teams, each offer is a 
distinctly separate transaction and the particulars of one offer are not common knowledge 
to the other teams. The concept of establishing a price range in the market for 
quarterback services, rather than a specific price, is a defining characteristic of a bilateral 
oligopoly. 

Underlying Assumptions 

As variables were identified and considered for inclusion in the model, several 
key assumptions were made regarding both the quarterback and the team owner. The 
most important being that each wants to win football games and, ultimately, the NFL 
championship. This is the nature of athletic competition. As such, the function a football 
team, in which the quarterback is a factor of production in that function, is to win football 
games. If they win enough, they will be the champions of the NFL. If an owner does not 
believe a player will contribute towards this goal, that player will likely be waived or 
traded. Similarly, if players are not convinced that the owner has the same goal, they will 
find ways to leave (via trade or not re-signing). In addition to winning games, the 
quarterback is attempting to maximize his salary while the team owner is attempting to 
sign the quarterback he covets at the lowest possible salary. Whether winning games or 
salary is the most critical factor will differ in each situation. Some players are more 
interested in maximizing their salary while others might be more interested in winning 
championships. The same likely holds true for owners. 

In signing a quarterback, the team owner's principal objective is to develop a 
situation that fosters a synergy between the quarterback and the rest of his teammates that 


19 


leads to wins and championships. The quarterback's past performance, combined with 
how well he fits into their offense (i.e., passing teams need a passing quarterback) are all 
part of the expectations an owner has when signing a quarterback. Again, it is a team 
game and the quarterback cannot win games by himself. 

Additionally, reality says that not all teams can expect to compete for a 
championship each year. Some teams are young and inexperienced while others are 
rebuilding, etc. This gives rise to the notion that teams are in unique situations within 
which they must decide how much they are willing to spend in signing a quarterback (or 
any player for that matter). Logically, if a team is not likely to go to the play-off, then the 
owner will be less inclined to pay top dollar for a premium quarterback unless the owner 
plans to make the him a cornerstone to building or rebuilding a contending team. 
Conversely, the quarterback must also be convinced that the team he is considering fits 
into his objective whether it is to play for a contending team or if the team has plenty of 
money to spend. 

In his 1962 book "The Economics of Labor", Phelps Brown asked "Why rates of 
pay are different for different types of labor?"5 The answer is that labor is a factor of 
production and will vary from production process to production process. From a 
theoretical standpoint, wages are high in markets where demand is high and supply is 
low, while lower wages are associated with markets where demand is relatively low and 
supply is high. Higher wages are sometimes the result of a scarcity of workers, high 
demand for a product, or the expectation by an employer of high productivity. In 
situations were the opposite is true, lower relative wages will prevail. 

In the market for NFL quarterbacks, some factors that might affect a party¡¯s 
bargaining position (and, subsequently, the negotiated price) include the number of 
currently available quarterbacks, the specific needs of a team, the attractiveness of the 

5 Phelps-Brown, page 3 


20 


team to the quarterback, and others. With these factors influencing price ranges, it is 
useful to distinguish between skills that can be duplicated through training and education 
and skills that cannot. If one individual possesses an ability that a second individual 
cannot duplicate regardless of the amount of training and/or education consumed, than 
the wages earned by the first individual have an element of economic rent that is not 
available to the second individual.6 The high salaries that NFL quarterbacks command are 
an example of how economic rents can create large wage differences. It is conceivable 
that there are individuals who can throw a football farther and run faster than some NFL 
quarterbacks because there are weight lifters who are likely stronger and track and field 
sprinters that are likely faster. However, it is unlikely that they also possess the ability to 
"read" opponents defenses and make instantaneous and correct decisions. 

6 Baumol and Blinder, page 622 


Section IV: 
PARAMETERS OF THE STUDY 


In the early stages of this study, it was necessary to define the time period over 
which the analysis would be conducted, set parameters around which quarterback 
contract signings should be included in the study, and take steps to ensure the data 
collected was consistent. 

Time Period of Study 

After careful consideration, it was determined that it would be inappropriate to 
compare the average salaries of today¡¯s NFL quarterbacks to their counterparts in past 
eras. In some eras, quarterbacks played football to supplement their regular income from 
other sources, while the modern day quarterback is often paid in the millions and trains 
year-round. Further, a number of on- and off-field changes have evolved creating greater 
disparity between the game of football in the 1980s and 1990s versus the game that was 
played in the 1950s and 1960s. Several of these changes include free agency, greater 
exposure through television, increased fan support leading to higher team revenues, and 
changes to the game's rules. 

Additionally, statistical information from past generations is often incomplete. 
There does not appear to be any reliable sources for obtaining the necessary salary 
information on players from the 1960s and 1970s. And, given the advances that have 
occurred in the gathering and managing statistical information, the amount of data 
available on today¡¯s game far exceeds the data that was tracked in past generations. As a 
result of these constraints, it was decided that the study should focus on quarterback 
signings during the 1980s and 1990s. 

The chosen time period (1987-1993) was selected as a result of several key events 
relating to the NFL and its labor negotiations. In 1987, the football players in the NFL 

21 



22 


staged a strike that lasted through training camp and the first three games of the regular 
season. At stake was the free agent system under which players could sign with new 
teams either at the end of their current contract or during option years. The collective 
bargaining agreement that ended the player's strike established new guidelines for the 
system. Under the old system, if a free agent player decided to change teams, the team 
signing the player must compensate the other team with a draft choice. This, combined 
with a guaranteed minimum increase of 10% over their previous salary, discouraged 
much free agent movement. In fact, when Wilbur Marshall of the Chicago Bears signed 
as a free agent in 1988 with the Washington Redskins, he was only the second player to 
do so in the 11-year history of free agency.7 

Under the new agreement, players were designated as either restricted or 
unrestricted free agents depending on their years in the league. If a restricted free agent 
received an offer from another team, his current team could choose to match the offer or 
receive compensation in the form of draft choices. An unrestricted free agent was free to 
move to another team without compensating the team he left. This provided players with 
an opportunity to test the market in an attempt to determine their true value and maximize 
their salaries. Free agent signings exploded, driving up the salaries of all players. For 
example, the average quarterback¡¯s base salary in 1982 was $161,380; in 1987 it was 
$340,438 with seven quarterbacks making over $1 million and 19 making over $600,000 
per year.8 By 1992, the average salary for all quarterbacks was $969,990, a six-fold 
increase in 10 years.9 Interestingly enough, if football follows the standard set by Major 
League Baseball and the National Hockey League, player salaries will correlate more 
closely with performance under free agency than with no free agency agreement (See Hill 
and Spellman, 1983). 

In an attempt to slow down rapidly escalating salaries, team owners and players 

7 St. Petersburg Times, June 15, 1992

8

 Atlanta Journal and Constitution, December 22, 1994

9

 Atlanta Journal and Constitution, December 22, 1994 


23 


negotiated a new labor agreement in 1993 that included a salary cap that was put into 
effect prior to the 1994 season. For that season, the cap was set at $34.6 million in salary 
expenses per team; in 1995, the cap was raised to $36.5 million.10 The cap limits 
spending by teams on salaries and benefits to 64% of the NFL's defined gross revenues, 
that is, the revenues from ticket sales and broadcasting.11 

Also included in the same labor agreement is another element that affects the 
purity of the labor market for quarterbacks. This is the option that teams have to protect 
certain players by designating them as a "franchise" player. By rule, these players are 
offered the average of the top five salaries league-wide in their position while allowing 
the team the right of first refusal if a second team makes an offer to the player. If the first 
team decides not to match the offer, it will be compensated in draft choices with the 
number of choices and draft round dependent upon the current salary of the player in 
question. 

On a related note, this period also coincides with the end of a boom in the growth 
of television revenues for the NFL. In 1982, the three networks - CBS, NBC, and ABC signed 
a 5-year, $2.1 billion dollar contract with the NFL. This averages out to $15 
million per team per year. In 1987, a fourth network -ESPN - entered the picture with a 
3-year, $1.43 billion contract. By 1990, each team received approximately $33.8 million 
in television revenues, a 225% increase over eight years.12 

Characteristics of Selected Quarterbacks 

In selecting quarterback signings to be included in this study, the contract had to 
have been signed during the 1987 to 1993 time period. Second, it was decided that only 
quarterbacks who attempted at least 100 passes the season prior to their signing and had 

10 Atlanta Journal and Constitution, February 8, 199511 USA Today, February 16, 199412 Orange County Register, March 16, 1987 


24 


NFL experience would be included in the study. This means that no quarterbacks who 
played only a few plays (we'll call them "back-ups") nor rookies (See Jones and Walsh, 
1988) were considered. Back-up quarterbacks presented two problems. First, they 
normally don't get enough playing time to produce the statistics needed to credible 
analyze the data. For example, it would be inappropriate to compare the statistics of a 
quarterback that threw 35 passes all year to a quarterback that threw 350 passes primarily 
because the back-up quarterback is often faced with game situations that the starting 
quarterback does not face. This could mean the game's outcome has already been 
decided, the game is meaningless in terms of post-season play, or an injury to the starting 
quarterback necessitates the use of the back-up even though he has not practiced as 
regularly as the starting quarterback. 

Second, teams have varying reasons for signing a quarterback to a back-up role 
that are outside the scope of this study. For instance, a team with a young starting 
quarterback may pay what appears to be a high salary for a veteran back-up quarterback 
whose principal contribution will be to serve as a tutor to the younger quarterback. 
Teams whose starting quarterbacks have difficulty in staying healthy are also willing to 
pay higher than expected salaries to have a capable back-up in case the starter gets 
injured. This is especially the case if the team believes that it is good enough to advance 
into post-season play and wants the security of a veteran back-up quarterback on the 
bench. 

In the case of a rookie quarterback, he has not played against defenses at the NFL 
level and, thus, the statistics he produced in college are not comparable to the statistics 
produced by a starting NFL quarterback. In college, the level of competition varies so 
widely between conferences and divisions that there exists a certain degree of 
unintentional "statistics padding". Additionally, a rookie's salary is largely determined by 
the salaries of players drafted directly ahead of and behind him, and by the salary of the 
player drafted in the same position in the previous year's draft. For example, the eighth 


25 


player selected in the draft will likely have an annual salary somewhere between the 
annual salaries of the seventh and the ninth draft picks. This practice is known as 
slotting.13 

In summary, the freedom resulting from the 1987 free agency agreement and the 
restrictive salary cap implemented in 1994 created a natural time frame in which to 
analyze this issue. Once the cap was implemented, teams attempted to maneuver around 
the cap in order to sign higher-priced players. One approach was to offer exorbitant 
"signing" bonuses up front that could be spread out over the length of the contract. This 
enabled teams that had little room under the salary cap to compete with teams having 
more cap room for marquee players. 

Data Collection and Handling 

To develop this model, several types of data were needed: specifics of salary 
packages, on-field performance statistics and off-field financial results related to the 
team. While the on-field quarterback statistics and off-field team financial data were 
easily obtainable, salary information was less readily available and it was necessary to 
rely on newspaper articles and periodicals for this information. (It should be noted that 
two quarterbacks sat out the season prior to signing a contract as a result of contract 
disputes. In each case, on-field statistics for the last season they played were used.) A 
complete data set is attached as an appendix. 

To maximize the search for player contract signings, two databases that were part 
of the Washington Research Library Consortium were accessed. The first database was a 
multi-subject periodical list that spanned the years 1983 to 1993. The second information 
source was a newspaper abstract database covering 1989 to 1993. Multiple searches were 
conducted in both databases using keywords such as "athletes", "salaries", "wages", and 

13 USA Today, February 28, 1990 


26 


"income", just to name a few. In addition, a list of all quarterbacks that played in the 
NFL between 1987 and 1993 was compiled and last-name searches were conducted. This 
list consisted of approximately 75 quarterbacks. 

Since renegotiating contracts is a fairly common practice, especially after a player 
has an exceptional year, the model uses player statistics from the season prior to the 
signing of the contract. This builds a one-year lag period into the analysis. In all cases, 
salary packages were converted to an average annual amount over the course of the 
contract. This enables salary packages of differing lengths to be compared with one 
another. The salary packages included base salaries as well as any signing, reporting or 
roster bonuses. However, incentive bonuses were not included since the data was not 
consistently available. Once an average annual salary had been calculated, it was 
adjusted for inflation using the Consumer Price Index (CPI). For this model, annual 
salaries have been adjusted to 1993 dollars. 


Section V: 
EMPIRICAL RESULTS 


As noted previously, a key difference between a bilateral oligopoly market and a 
competitive market is that price and quantity are indeterminate in a bilateral market. Of 
course this does not mean that the market collapses or that participants are unable to 
reach agreement on price and quantity.14 It means only that there is insufficient 
information to reach a precise market solution. Price and quantity are determined not 
only by cost and demand factors, but also by other factors such as the uniqueness of the 
quarterback, the team's distinct needs, bargaining positions, skill of the negotiators, etc. 
Regardless of how good a quarterback is, there is a limit to how much a team will pay. 
Conversely, there is a minimum amount that a quarterback would be willing to settle for 
and will not sign for anything below that. 

As a result, this model is not necessarily a predictive model. Its function is to 
provide some insights into which variables weigh more heavily in determining 
quarterback salaries. As appropriate to a bilateral situation, an absolute market solution is 
not available because each negotiation is unique. Some of the variables may apply to 
certain situations while other situations may call for a different set of variables. 

Model Results 

Results from Equation 1: 

Variable X Coefficient Standard Error t-statistic 
Pass Attempts 0.628 0.020 30.762 
Years in NFL 2.173 0.929 2.338 

This equation was applied to 32 observations. The R2 is .971 with the t-statistics for both 
variables being significant at the 5% level. The sign for each variable is as expected. 
Additionally, the Durbin-Watson statistic was 1.81 indicating no significant serial 
correlation. 

14 Ferguson and Gould, page 288 

27 



28 


Results from Equation 2: 

Variable X Coefficient Standard Error t-statistic 
Yards/Completion 2.009 0.406 4.952 
Touchdowns 0.867 0.088 9.901 
Interceptions -1.261 0.117 -10.819 
Percentage Completed 144.271 12.016 12.007 

Applied to 32 observations, this equation resulted in an R2 of .963 with the t-statistic for 
each of the four variables being significant at the 5% level. The sign for each variable is 
as expected and the Durbin-Watson statistic was 2.01 indicating no significant serial 
correlation. 

Results from Equation 3: 

Variable X Coefficient Standard Error t-statistic 
Team Revenue 0.076 0.029 2.572 
Player Costs 0.027 0.022 1.213 
Team Wins -0.135 0.099 -1.361 
Completions 0.010 0.003 3.636 
Career Win-Loss 5.186 1.90 2.733 
Rating Previous 
Year 
0.016 0.020 0.787 
Pro Bowl Selection 0.749 0.678 1.104 
NFL Champions -0.031 0.806 -0.039 

Equation 3 was run against 32 observations. The resulting R2 is .731 with the t-statistics 
for team revenue, completions and career win-loss record being significant at the 5% 
level. The t-statistics for the remaining variables were not significant. The sign for each 
variable is as expected with the exception of the sign for NFL champions. This sign was 
negative instead of positive, though the estimate is not statistically significant. In 
addition, the Durbin-Watson statistic was 2.09 indicating no significant serial correlation. 


Section VI: 
CONCLUSIONS 


The foregoing analysis suggests a number of conclusions, primarily that a 
bilateral labor framework exists in the labor market for NFL quarterbacks. A 
quarterback¡¯s salary is impacted by his on-field performance and by certain variables 
associated with the team that signs him. From the player¡¯s perspective, the variables that 
most significantly impact salaries were the quarterback¡¯s career win-loss record and the 
number of passes they completed the previous year. Interestingly enough, the statistical 
significance of these two variables indicate that the quarterback is rewarded for his 
performance during his most reason season (completions) and for his performance over 
the course of his career (win-loss record). 

The conclusions based on the player variables are consistent with the findings 
surrounding the one team-related variable that proved statistically significant in the 
model¡¯s principal equation: team revenue. As reported in several studies (Scully, 1974; 
Medoff, 1976; and Scott, et al., 1983), a team¡¯s revenue is closely correlated with their 
winning percentage. As the team¡¯s winning percentage increases, so does its revenue. 
The results of this model support those findings and indicate that team owners recognize 
the importance of having a quarterback who is a proven winner in the NFL lead the team. 

It should be noted that while this study is designed to cover as completely as 
possible the on-field quantitative contributions to salary determination, it is not within its 
scope to address certain qualitative contributions. For instance, while variables such as 
courage and intelligence may be embedded in the on-field performance of the 
quarterback, his marquee value may not be measurable. One can infer certain hypotheses 
through a team's ticket revenue performance after signing a particular quarterback. 
However, the causal relationships embedded within these circumstances would be very 
difficult to define. 

29 



Finally, it would be difficult to determine the impact other components of the 
football team have on the quarterback's salary level. There is a definite joint-production 
relationship between a team's offense (of which the quarterback leads), the defense and 
the special teams, and their ability to generate victories. This further assumes that 
increases in victories, all things being equal, will lead to increases in the salaries of key 
individual players, of which the quarterback is often considered one. This model has 
attempted to capture the talent level of the players supporting the quarterback by 
including a "player costs" variable. The implication is that teams with higher player costs 
will, in general, attract the more talented players. However, this variable was not 
considered statistically significant in the model¡¯s principal equation. 

30 



References 

1. 
Ahlburg, Dennis A., and James B. Dworkin, "Player Compensation in the 
National Football League," in Paul D. Staudohar and James A. Mangan (ed.), The 
Business of Professional Sports, University of Illinois Press, 1991. 
2. 
Atkinson, Scott E., Linda R. Stanley and John Tschirhart, "Revenue Sharing as an 
Incentive in an Agency Problem: An Example from the NFL," RAND Journal of 
Economics, Spring 1988. 
3. 
Becker, G.S., "Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis," 1964. 
4. 
Bishop, John A., J. Howard Finch and John P. Formby, "Risk Aversion and Rent-
Seeking Redistributions: Free Agency in the National Football League," Southern 
Economic Journal, July 1990, pp. 114-124. 
5. 
Blair, Roger D., David L. Kaserman, and Richard E. Romano, "A Pedagogical 
Treatment of Bilateral Monopoly," Southern Economic Journal, April 1989, pp. 
831-841. 
6. 
Baumol, William J., and Alan S. Blinder, "Economics: Principles and Policy," 
Second Edition, 1982. 
7. 
Ferguson, C.E. and J.P. Gould, "Microeconomic Theory," Fourth Edition, 1975. 
8. 
Financial World Magazine¡¯s "Annual Franchise Valuation", 1991-1994. 
9. 
Greene, W.H., "Econometric Analysis," Second Edition, 1993. 
10. 
Gustafson, Elizabeth, and Lawrence Hadley, "Arbitration and Salary Gaps in 
Major League Baseball," Quarterly Journal of Business and Economics, Summer 
1995. 
11. 
Hill, James R., and William Spellman, "Professional Baseball: The Reserve 
Clause and Salary Structure," Industrial Relations, Vol. 22, No. 1, 1983. 
12. 
Horn, Henry, and Asher Wolinsky, "Bilateral Monopolies and Incentives for 
Merger," RAND Economic Journal, Autumn 1988, pp. 408-419. 
13. 
Jones, J.C.H., and William D. Walsh, "Salary Determination in the National 
Hockey League: The Effects of Skills, Franchise Characteristics, and 
Discrimination," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 41, No. 4, July 
1988. 
14. 
Kahn, Lawrence M. "The Effects of Race on Professional Football Players 
Compensation," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 45, No. 2, January 
1992. 
15. 
Maurice, S. Charles, and Owen R. Phillips, "Economic Analysis: Theory and 
Application," Fourth Edition, 1982. 
16. 
Medoff, Marshall, "On Monopsonistic Exploitation in Professional Baseball," 
Quarterly Review of Economics and Business, Summer 1976. 
17. 
Mendenhall, W., J.E. Reinmuth and R.J. Beaver, "Statistics for Management and 
Economics," 7th Edition, 1993. 
18. 
Mogull, Robert C., "Football Salaries and Race: Some Empirical Evidence," 
Industrial Relations, Vol. 12, February 1973. 
19. 
"National Football League Record and Fact Book", National Football League, 
New York, 1987-1993. 
20. 
Neft, David S., Richard M. Cohen and Rick Korch, "The Football Encyclopedia," 
St. Martin's Press, 1994. 
21. 
Phelps Brown, E.H., "The Economics of Labor," Yale University Press, 1962. 
31 



32 


22. 
Porter, Philip K., and Gerald W. Scully, "The Distribution of Earnings and the 
Rules of the Game," Southern Economic Journal, July 1996. 
23. 
Ross, Gary Neil, "The Determination of Bonuses in Professional Sports," 
American Economist, Fall 1975. 
24. 
Scahill, Edward, "The Determinants of Average Salaries in Professional 
Football," Atlantic Economic Journal, Vol. 13, March 1985. 
25. 
Scott, Frank A. Jr., James E. Long and Ken Somppi, "Free Agency, Owner 
Incentives and the National Football League Player¡¯s Association," Journal of 
Labor Research, Summer 1983. 
26. 
Scoville, James C., "Labor Relations in Sports," in Roger Noll (ed.) Government 
and the Sports Business, Brookings Institute, 1974. 
27. 
Scully Gerald W., "Pay and Performance in Major League Baseball," American 
Economic Review, December 1974, pp. 915-930. 
28. 
Scully, Gerald W., "The Market Structure of Sports," University of Chicago Press, 
1995. 
29. 
Sommers, Paul M., and Noel Quinton, "Pay and Performance in Major League 
Baseball: The Case of the First Family of Free Agents," The Journal of Human 
Resources, Vol. 17, 1982. 
30. 
Staudohar, Paul, "Playing for Dollars: Labor Relations and the Sports Business," 
Cornell University Press, 1996. 
31. 
"Street and Smith¡¯s Guide to Pro Football," Ballantine Books, New York,1994. 
32. 
Vrooman, John, "A General Theory of Professional Sports Leagues," Southern 
Economic Journal, April 1995. 
33. 
Zech, Z.E., "Empirical Estimation of a Production Function: Major League 
Baseball," American Economist, Fall 1981. 

APPENDIX: 
Data Set and Sources 


33 



DATA SET 


# Player Year 
Signed 
Signing Team Adjusted 
Salary 
($93M) 
Pass 
Attempts 
Years in 
NFL 
1 Everett, Jim 1990 LA Rams 2.58 518 4 
2 Fourcade, John 1990 New Orleans 0.50 107 3 
3 Kelly, Jim 1990 Buffalo 3.16 391 4 
4 Kramer, Tommy 1990 New Orleans 0.55 136 13 
5 Majkowski, Don 1990 Green Bay 1.66 599 3 
6 Montana, Joe 1990 San Francisco 4.42 386 11 
7 Schroeder, Jay 1990 LA Raiders 1.22 194 6 
8 Tomczak, Mike 1990 Chicago 0.88 306 5 
9 Hebert, Bobby 1991 New Orleans 1.45 353 6 
10 Harbaugh, Jim 1991 Chicago 1.33 312 4 
11 Majkowski, Don 1991 Green Bay 1.80 264 4 
12 Rypien, Mark 1991 Washington 1.49 304 4 
13 Kosar, Bernie 1992 Cleveland 3.97 494 7 
14 Marino, Dan 1992 Miami 5.15 549 9 
15 Millen, Hugh 1992 New England 1.42 409 5 
16 Moon, Warren 1992 Houston 4.12 655 8 
17 Rypien, Mark 1992 Washington 3.09 421 5 
18 Walsh, Steve 1993 New Orleans 0.91 255 3 
19 Aikman, Troy 1993 Dallas 6.25 473 4 
20 Carlson, Cody 1993 Houston 2.93 227 6 
21 Elway, John 1993 Denver 4.80 316 10 
22 Esiason, Boomer 1993 NY Jets 3.00 278 9 
23 Harbaugh, Jim 1993 Chicago 3.25 358 6 
24 Hebert, Bobby 1993 Atlanta 3.47 422 8 
25 Hostetler, Jeff 1993 LA Raiders 2.60 192 8 
26 Kosar, Bernie 1993 Cleveland 0.83 155 8 
27 Nagle, Browning 1993 NY Jets 0.75 387 2 
28 O'Donnell, Neil 1993 Pittsburgh 2.73 313 3 
29 Simms, Phil 1993 NY Giants 2.50 137 13 
30 Testaverde, Vinny 1993 Cleveland 1.40 358 6 
31 Wilson, Wade 1993 New Orleans 1.00 163 12 
32 Young, Steve 1993 San Francisco 5.30 402 8 

34 



DATA SET (cont) 

# Yards/ 
Completion 
Touchdown 
Passes 
Interceptions 
Completion 
% 
Adj. Total 
Team 
Revenue 
($93M) 
Adj. Player 
Costs 
($93M) 
1 14.18 29 17 0.59 54.62 20.34 
2 15.25 7 4 0.57 52.74 16.69 
3 13.73 25 18 0.58 53.40 22.22 
4 11.77 7 7 0.57 52.74 16.69 
5 12.23 27 20 0.59 46.66 24.21 
6 12.99 28 8 0.70 57.16 32.84 
7 17.03 8 13 0.47 51.08 24.88 
8 13.18 16 16 0.51 55.72 22.55 
9 12.10 15 15 0.63 53.58 24.08 
10 12.10 10 6 0.58 60.05 23.77 
11 12.83 10 12 0.57 47.74 25.36 
12 12.47 16 11 0.55 55.38 29.60 
13 11.36 18 9 0.62 53.35 21.73 
14 12.48 25 13 0.58 54.59 41.82 
15 12.49 9 18 0.60 48.92 27.40 
16 11.61 23 21 0.62 57.06 32.96 
17 14.31 28 11 0.59 57.37 39.24 
18 11.62 11 6 0.55 62.50 43.50 
19 11.41 23 14 0.64 92.90 41.80 
20 11.48 9 11 0.66 62.00 45.50 
21 12.89 10 17 0.55 59.60 38.00 
22 9.77 11 15 0.52 59.20 43.20 
23 12.31 13 12 0.56 65.40 35.30 
24 13.20 19 16 0.59 59.80 40.30 
25 11.89 8 3 0.54 58.80 43.30 
26 11.26 8 7 0.66 65.10 37.00 
27 11.88 7 17 0.50 59.20 43.20 
28 12.34 13 9 0.59 57.80 28.10 
29 10.99 5 3 0.61 65.30 45.00 
30 12.40 14 16 0.58 65.10 37.00 
31 12.31 13 4 0.68 62.50 43.50 
32 12.93 25 7 0.67 70.40 55.70 

35 



DATA SET (cont) 

# # Wins Previous 
Year - Signing 
Team 
Completion 
s (fitted) 
Career Win 
- Loss % 
Previous 
Year 
Rating 
(fitted) 
Pro Bowl 
(Yes=1, 
No=0) 
Super 
Bowl 
Champ 
(Yes=1, 
No=0) 
1 11 307 0.60 90.4 0 0 
2 9 49 0.64 87.4 0 0 
3 9 227 0.49 84.2 0 0 
4 9 67 0.48 76.1 0 0 
5 10 358 0.52 81.3 1 0 
6 14 224 0.69 115.1 1 1 
7 8 104 0.67 66.0 0 0 
8 6 174 0.69 67.3 0 0 
9 8 204 0.58 82.7 0 0 
10 11 178 0.57 82.2 0 0 
11 6 148 0.51 74.8 0 0 
12 10 173 0.63 77.4 0 0 
13 6 292 0.53 90.3 0 0 
14 8 327 0.62 87.5 1 0 
15 6 239 0.44 70.5 0 0 
16 11 393 0.47 79.3 1 0 
17 14 246 0.72 98.0 1 1 
18 12 142 0.44 78.6 0 0 
19 13 279 0.50 90.9 1 1 
20 10 124 0.67 85.2 0 0 
21 8 180 0.63 66.1 0 0 
22 4 156 0.49 58.5 0 0 
23 5 207 0.56 75.8 0 0 
24 6 247 0.65 81.5 0 0 
25 7 102 0.64 78.0 0 0 
26 7 79 0.51 90.1 0 0 
27 4 225 0.23 53.6 0 0 
28 11 178 0.55 83.5 1 0 
29 6 68 0.59 83.6 0 0 
30 7 207 0.33 73.4 0 0 
31 12 84 0.55 102.7 0 0 
32 14 234 0.53 108.5 1 0 

36 



Data Sources 
Contract signings of individual quarterbacks (average annual salary) were 
identified from various newspapers, primarily the USA Today. 

Equation 1: 

Variable Data Source 
Pass Attempts "The NFL Record and Fact Book", National Football 
League (1987-1993) 
Years in NFL "The Football Encyclopedia", St. Martin¡¯s Press 1994 

Equation 2: 

Variable Data Source 
Yards/Completion "The NFL Record and Fact Book", National Football 
League (1987-1993) 
Touchdowns "The NFL Record and Fact Book", National Football 
League (1987-1993) 
Interceptions "The NFL Record and Fact Book", National Football 
League (1987-1993) 
Percentage Completed "The NFL Record and Fact Book", National Football 
League (1987-1993) 

Equation 3: 

Variable Data Source 
Team Revenue Financial World Magazine¡¯s Annual Franchise 
Valuation Issue (1991-1994) 
Player Costs Financial World Magazine¡¯s Annual Franchise 
Valuation Issue (1991-1994) 
Team Wins "The NFL Record and Fact Book", National Football 
League (1987-1993) 
Completions Fitted from Equation #1 
Career Win-Loss "The Football Encyclopedia", St. Martin¡¯s Press 1994 
Rating Previous Year Fitted from Equation #2 
Pro Bowl Selection "The Football Encyclopedia", St. Martin¡¯s Press 1994 
NFL Champions "The Football Encyclopedia", St. Martin¡¯s Press 1994 

37 



VITA 
Eric J. Martin 


Mr. Martin has over ten years of experience providing technical and management support 
to federal sector and state clients. His areas of expertise include information 
management/information technology; project management; information systems 
evaluation and assessment; database design and development; data collection, modeling 
and analysis; program development and evaluation; and, policy and management 
analysis. His federal clients have included the Department of Health and Human Services 
(HHS), the Department of Energy (DOE), the Department of Labor (DOL), the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Corporation for National Service 
(CNS). In addition, he has directed and supported projects for the States of Pennsylvania 
and South Carolina. 

Born on August 31, 1963 in Pasadena, California, Mr. Martin currently resides in 
Virginia with his wife and two daughters. He holds a Bachelor of Arts in Economics 
from George Mason University and a Master of Arts in Economics from Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University. 

38 



