Gene finding using multiple related species: a classification approach. 
Manolis Kellis 

Special review for the Encyclopedia of Genomics, Proteomics, and Bioinformatics. 
John Wiley and Sons, editors. (in press) 


Three years after the initial sequencing of the human genome, the actual number of 
functional human genes remains uncertain. Several expression-based analyses still argue 
for a hundred thousand transcribed genes, whereas more conservative estimates range 
between 20 and 25 thousand genes. The central question in such debates still remains: 
what constitutes a real gene? In this paper, we address this question and present a 
comparative genomics approach for systematic gene identification, which observes gene-
specific signatures of evolutionary selection across multiple related species. First, we 
formulate the gene identification problem as a classification problem between genes and 
non-coding regions, based on their distinct patterns of nucleotide change. We then 
summarize the results of applying this approach to re-annotate the yeast genome, with 
changes affecting nearly 15% of all genes, and the rejection of more than 500 previously 
annotated genes. Finally, we discuss the implications of this analysis on understanding the 
human genome, and strategies for the systematic reannotation of higher eukaryotes. 

Ideally, we should be able to systematically discover all the functional genes in a newly 
sequenced genome, from its sequence alone. Computational discovery methods rely both on the 
direct signals used by the cell to guide transcription, splicing, and translation, and also on 
indirect signals such as evolutionary conservation. In this paper, we summarize the principles of 
a classification-based approach for systematic gene identification, based on comparative 
sequence information from multiple closely related species. We first frame gene identification as 
a classification problem of distinguishing real genes from spurious gene predictions. We then 
present the Reading Frame Conservation test1, a new computational method implementing such a 
classification approach, based on the patterns of nucleotide changes in the alignment of 
orthologous regions. We finally summarize our results of applying this method to re-annotate 
the yeast genome2, and the challenges of using related methods to discover all functional genes 
in the human genome. 

Defining real genes 

What is a real gene? This question is relatively easy to answer for those genes that are 
abundantly expressed, encode well-characterized proteins, and whose disruption affects a 
specific function in the organism. Beyond these, the distinction is much more subtle between 
functional genes and spurious gene predictions. 

Experimentally, the definition of a functional gene comes largely as accumulating evidence of its 
usage, including gene expression3, protein fragments4, biochemical function5, protein 
interactions6, or the effect of its disruption7. It is important to note, however, that absence of 
experimental evidence does not imply that a gene annotation is spurious: a real gene may be 
missing experimental evidence because it is not used in the particular conditions surveyed. 
Conversely, any individual report of gene usage could be due to experimental noise, cross-
hybridization, or chance transcription events due to a basal level of intergenic transcription. 
Thus, experimental evidence alone is insufficient to distinguish between real genes and spurious 
gene predictions. 


Computationally, the processes of transcription, splicing and translation can be thought of as a 
series of decisions taken by the cell, based on signals in the genome. These signals include 
distant enhancer elements, regulatory elements surrounding the transcription start site, splicing 
enhancer and repressor signals in the message, and translation signals in the sequence or 
structure of mature mRNAs8-11 . The subset of these signals that we currently understand is 
insufficient to specify the set of known genes. Thus, in addition to the direct signals used by the 
cell, gene identification methods12-18 routinely identify genes using additional indirect signals 
(reviewed in 19), which are not available to the cell, although they are generally good indicators 
of protein-coding genes. These include the frequency of each codon in protein-coding regions, 
the overall length of the translated protein product, and importantly the evolutionary 
conservation of protein sequences across related species. 

Evolutionary conservation is perhaps the strongest indicator that a predicted gene is functional. 
A gene that confers even a slight evolutionary advantage can be conserved across millions of 
years, regardless of the rarity of its usage. Hence, even if experimental methods fail to detect the 
usage of a gene in a given set of experimental conditions, evolutionary methods are able to detect 
indirect evidence of its usage, by detecting pressure to preserve its function over millions of 
years. 

Gene finding as a classification problem 

The challenge of using evolutionary conservation to define genes lies in the ability to reject 
spurious genes. Although it is generally well understood that genes conserved across large 
evolutionary distances are functional, lack of conservation is generally attributed to evolutionary 
divergence, thus lacking evidence towards either accepting or rejecting a gene prediction. 

Yet, the comparison of related genomes contains information much richer than simply the 
presence or absence of a protein in a genome. By working with closely related genomes, we can 
define regions of conserved gene order, or synteny blocks, which span several genes, and 
potentially entire chromosomes. Defining conserved synteny blocks allows us to construct 
global alignments, spanning both well-conserved regions, but also regions of low conservation. 
In particular, these give us access to full nucleotide alignments for all predicted genes, and for all 
intergenic regions within orthologous segments. 

With the availability of orthologous alignments for both protein-coding and non-coding regions, 
we can study their distinct properties and build a classifier between the two types of region. The 
simplest and most commonly used such classifier observes the overall level of nucleotide 
conservation in the alignment, and selects regions of high conservation as likely to be functional. 
Other classifiers may observe more subtle signals, such as the number of amino acid changes per 
nucleotide substitution20, the frequency of insertions and deletions, the periodicity of mutations, 
and so on. By working with properties of the nucleotide alignment, rather than protein 
alignments, we are able to apply it uniformly to evaluate both genes and intergenic regions in the 
same test. 

One particular conservation property unique to protein-coding segments is the pressure to 
preserve the reading frame of translation. Since protein sequences are translated every three 
nucleotides, the length of insertions and deletions (indels) is largely constrained to remain a 
multiple of three, thus preserving the frame of translation. Within coding regions, indels which 
disrupt the frame of translation are excluded, or compensated with nearby indels which restore 


the reading frame. In non-coding regions, the length of indels does not have this constraint, and 
short spacing changes are tolerated. 

To evaluate this property quantitatively, we developed the Reading Frame Conservation (RFC) 
test. This test evaluates the pressure to preserve reading frame in a fully aligned interval, by 
measuring the portion of nucleotides in this interval for which the reading-frame has been locally 
conserved1. The RFC test provides a classifier between coding and non-coding regions that is 
completely independent of the traditional signals used in gene identification. It does not rely on 
start, stop, or splicing signals, nor does it rely on the conservation of protein sequence. It can 
therefore be combined with existing gene finding tools and provide a highly informative score 
for any interval considered. 

Reannotation of yeast 

A classification approach is particularly well-suited for the yeast genome. The general scarcity of 
introns makes it hard to rely on splicing signals to discover genes. Thus, the annotation of S. 
cerevisiae has traditionally relied solely on the length of predicted proteins to annotate genes, 
resulting in 6062 annotated open reading frames (ORFs) which potentially encode proteins of at 
least 100 amino acids (aa). Additionally, a tentative functional annotation has been inferred for 
as many as 3966 of these ORFs, based on classical genetic experiments and systematic genome-
wide studies of gene expression, deletion phenotype, and protein-protein interaction. Together, 
the interval-based annotation, and the large set of well-known genes make it possible to apply the 
RFC test systematically to evaluate the functional significance of the remaining ORFs. 

To apply the test, we constructed multiple sequence alignments for every ORF and every 
intergenic region, across four closely related species. We sequenced and assembled the genomes 
of S. paradoxus, S. mikatae, and S. bayanus2, and defined genome-wide synteny blocks with S. 
cerevisiae, based on discrete anchors provided by unique protein blast hits1. Within these 
synteny blocks, we constructed global alignments of orthologous genes and intergenic regions 
across the four species using CLUSTALW21, and systematically evaluated each alignment. We 
compared S. cerevisiae to each species in turn, and every comparison cast a vote based on its 
overall RFC and a species-specific cutoff. A decision was then reached for each gene by tallying 
the votes from all comparison. 

We evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of the approach based on the 3966 genes with 
functional annotations (¡®known genes¡¯), and 340 randomly chosen intergenic sequences with 
lengths similar to the annotated ORFs. The RFC test correctly accepted 3951 known genes 
(99.6%) and rejected only 15 known genes; upon manual inspection, these 15 are indeed likely to 
be spurious (most lack experimental evidence, and deletion phenotypes of the rest are likely due 
to their overlap with the promoter of other known genes). The method also correctly rejected 326 
intergenic regions (96%), accepting only 14 intergenic regions (of which 10 appear to define 
short ORFs or extend annotated ORFs, suggesting that at most 1% of true intergenic regions 
failed to be rejected by the RFC test). In summary, the RFC test shows a very strong 
discrimination between genes and intergenic regions, with sensitivity and specificity values 
greater than 99%. 

We then applied the RFC test to all previously annotated genes, leading to a major revisiting of 
the yeast gene set. For ORFs with lengths greater than 100 aa, our analysis accepted 5538 ORFs 
and rejected 503 (of which 376 were immediately rejected, 105 were rejected with additional 
criteria, and 32 were merged with neighboring ORFs); the classifier abstained from making a 


decision in 20 cases. The rejected ORFs show an abundance of frame-shifting indels across their 
entire length, in-frame stop codons, and low conservation of protein sequence, in addition to the 
low RFC score; their length distribution and atypical codon usage additionally suggest that they 
are likely occurring by chance22-24; furthermore previous systematic experimentation showed no 
compelling evidence that these may encode a functional gene. Thus, it appears that more than 
500 previously annotated ORFs in the yeast genome are spurious predictions. 

Below the 100 amino acid cutoff, no previous systematic annotation or experimentation was 
available. Thus, to validate our method, we compared the results of the RFC test with an 
independent metric: the proportion of the S. cerevisiae ORF that was also free of stop codons in 
the other three species. Between 50 and 99 aa, we found that the method is still reliable, and 
report 43 candidate new genes at that length. As ORFs smaller than 50 aa were tested, we found 
that the specificity of the test decreased, since small intervals tend to be devoid of indels by 
chance rather than the presence of selective pressure. Thus, additional constraints, and additional 
species, will be needed to discover genes reliably at such short lengths. 

In addition to the discovery of genes themselves, the comparative analysis allowed us to refine 
gene boundaries. Once an interval was determined to be under selective pressure for reading 
frame conservation, the boundaries of that interval were adjusted, based on the conservation of 
start/stop/splice signals, and the boundaries over which reading frame is conserved. This led to a 
large-scale reannotation of gene structure, which affected hundreds of genes (146 start codon 
changes, 67 intron changes, 32 merges of consecutive ORFs, and 45 changes of ORF ends). It is 
worth noting that in 134 cases, the inferred boundary changes pinpointed sequencing errors in 
the primary sequence of S. cerevisiae, many of which were tested and corrected by re-
sequencing. These boundary changes reveal the true location of promoter regions, new protein 
domains in elongated ORFs, and previously overlooked functional relationships in the case of 
merged ORFs 

In summary, the RFC test was able to reliably distinguish between genes and intergenic regions, 
leading to a systematic reannotation of the yeast genome. The comparative analysis led to the 
rejection of more than 500 previously annotated genes and to the discovery of many novel genes. 
The results agree with similar comparative analyses carried out from a number of yeast species25


28. In addition, it allowed us to refine the gene structure of hundreds of genes, adjusting start and 
stop boundaries, merging consecutive ORFs, and discovering many new introns. Moreover, by 
using multiple species, the signals leading to gene identification were powerful enough to 
suggest sequence changes in any individual species, even in S. cerevisiae; we tested ~50 of these 
predicted sequencing errors in S. cerevisiae, confirming and correcting the large majority of 
them by resequencing. 
Implications for the human genome 

The challenge of gene finding in the human genome is far greater than in yeast, due to the vastly 
larger intergenic regions, numerous and large introns, small exons, and alternatively spliced 
genes. Most approaches to gene finding in higher eukaryotes have relied on Hidden Markov 
Models12-17, which inherently emphasize the importance of exon chaining, and rely on 
knowledge of the expected length distributions for both exons and introns. These have been 
recently extended to use sequence from multiple species29-38 . These approaches have limitations 
however, in cases of alternative splicing39-41, differences in splicing between species42, widely 
varying exon and intron lengths, and non-canonical splice sites. 


An exon-based classification approach to gene finding can help overcome these limitations. By 
exhaustively enumerating and testing all candidate protein-coding intervals, classification 
approaches make exon detection independent of chaining. Splice site models can be applied to 
each species independently and then compared to each other, which is much stronger than the 
evidence in any one species alone. The intervals can be then tested based on discriminating 
variables that distinguish genes from non-coding regions19,43. New discriminating variables can 
be defined as alignments of each type of region are systematically compared, and these can be 
combined and weighted, leveraging traditional machine learning techniques for feature selection 
and classification44. Once relevant intervals have been identified, their boundaries can be 
adjusted for optimal chaining into complete genes. In particular, chaining can also leverage an 
inferred frame of translation for each exon, based on the higher mutation rate observed in largely 
degenerate third codon positions20. The exon-chaining step produces full gene models, and is 
able to cope with alternative splicing and missing exons, since it is not constrained to a single 
optimal path through the exons. 

By systematically observing alignment properties of large sequence regions, we can build new 
rigorous approaches for sequence analysis. These are widely applicable beyond coding exons, 
and similar classification-based approaches can be used to distinguish CpG islands, 5¡¯- and 3¡¯untranslated 
regions, promoter regions, regulatory islands, and other functional elements. 
Through the lens of evolutionary selection, our ability to directly interpret genomes is 
revolutionized. Coupled with systematic experimentation and validation, these analyses can lead 
to a systematic catalogue of functional elements in the human genome, forming the future 
foundations of biomedical research. 

References 

1. 
Kellis, M., Patterson, N., Birren, B., Berger, B. & Lander, E. S. Methods in comparative 
genomics: genome correspondence, gene identification and regulatory motif discovery. J 
Comput Biol 11, 319-55 (2004). 
2. 
Kellis, M., Patterson, N., Endrizzi, M., Birren, B. & Lander, E. S. Sequencing and 
comparison of yeast species to identify genes and regulatory elements. Nature 423, 24154 
(2003). 
3. 
Velculescu, V. E. et al. Characterization of the yeast transcriptome. Cell 88, 243-51 
(1997). 
4. 
Rezaul, K., Wu, L., Mayya, V., Hwang, S. I. & Han, D. K. A systematic characterization 
of mitochondrial proteome from a human T leukemia cells. Mol Cell Proteomics (2004). 
5. 
Jackman, J. E., Montange, R. K., Malik, H. S. & Phizicky, E. M. Identification of the 
yeast gene encoding the tRNA m1G methyltransferase responsible for modification at 
position 9. Rna 9, 574-85 (2003). 
6. 
Bai, C. & Elledge, S. J. Gene identification using the yeast two-hybrid system. Methods 
Enzymol 283, 141-56 (1997). 
7. 
McAlister, L. & Holland, M. J. Targeted deletion of a yeast enolase structural gene. 
Identification and isolation of yeast enolase isozymes. J Biol Chem 257, 7181-8 (1982). 
8. 
Fairbrother, W. G., Yeh, R. F., Sharp, P. A. & Burge, C. B. Predictive identification of 
exonic splicing enhancers in human genes. Science 297, 1007-13 (2002). 
9. 
Wang, Z. et al. Systematic identification and analysis of exonic splicing silencers. Cell 
119, 831-45 (2004). 
10. 
Thanaraj, T. A. & Robinson, A. J. Prediction of exact boundaries of exons. Brief 
Bioinform 1, 343-56 (2000). 

11. 
Yeo, G. & Burge, C. B. Maximum entropy modeling of short sequence motifs with 
applications to RNA splicing signals. J Comput Biol 11, 377-94 (2004). 
12. 
Burge, C. & Karlin, S. Prediction of complete gene structures in human genomic DNA. J 
Mol Biol 268, 78-94 (1997). 
13. 
Majoros, W. H., Pertea, M. & Salzberg, S. L. TigrScan and GlimmerHMM: two open 
source ab initio eukaryotic gene-finders. Bioinformatics 20, 2878-9 (2004). 
14. 
Kulp, D., Haussler, D., Reese, M. G. & Eeckman, F. H. A generalized hidden Markov 
model for the recognition of human genes in DNA. Proc Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol 4, 
134-42 (1996). 
15. 
Krogh, A. Two methods for improving performance of an HMM and their application for 
gene finding. Proc Int Conf Intell Syst Mol Biol 5, 179-86 (1997). 
16. 
Henderson, J., Salzberg, S. & Fasman, K. H. Finding genes in DNA with a Hidden 
Markov Model. J Comput Biol 4, 127-41 (1997). 
17. 
Stanke, M. & Waack, S. Gene prediction with a hidden Markov model and a new intron 
submodel. Bioinformatics 19 Suppl 2, II215-II225 (2003). 
18. 
Salzberg, S., Delcher, A. L., Fasman, K. H. & Henderson, J. A decision tree system for 
finding genes in DNA. J Comput Biol 5, 667-80 (1998). 
19. 
Fickett, J. W. & Tung, C. S. Assessment of protein coding measures. Nucleic Acids Res 
20, 6441-50 (1992). 
20. 
Hurst, L. D. The Ka/Ks ratio: diagnosing the form of sequence evolution. Trends Genet 
18, 486 (2002). 
21. 
Higgins, D. G. & Sharp, P. M. CLUSTAL: a package for performing multiple sequence 
alignment on a microcomputer. Gene 73, 237-44 (1988). 
22. 
Goffeau, A. et al. Life with 6000 genes. Science 274, 546, 563-7 (1996). 
23. 
Dujon, B. et al. Complete DNA sequence of yeast chromosome XI. Nature 369, 371-8 
(1994). 
24. 
Sharp, P. M. & Li, W. H. The codon Adaptation Index--a measure of directional 
synonymous codon usage bias, and its potential applications. Nucleic Acids Res 15, 128195 
(1987). 
25. 
Cliften, P. et al. Finding functional features in Saccharomyces genomes by phylogenetic 
footprinting. Science 301, 71-6 (2003). 
26. 
Blandin, G. et al. Genomic exploration of the hemiascomycetous yeasts: 4. The genome 
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae revisited. FEBS Lett 487, 31-6 (2000). 
27. 
Wood, V., Rutherford, K. M., Ivens, A., Rajandream, M.-A. & Barrell, B. A Re-
annotation of the Saccaromyces cerevisiae Genome. Comparative and Functional 
Genomics 2, 143-154 (2001). 
28. 
Brachat, S. et al. Reinvestigation of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae genome annotation by 
comparison to the genome of a related fungus: Ashbya gossypii. Genome Biol 4, R45 
(2003). 
29. 
Yeh, R. F., Lim, L. P. & Burge, C. B. Computational inference of homologous gene 
structures in the human genome. Genome Res 11, 803-16 (2001). 
30. 
Siepel, A. & Haussler, D. Phylogenetic estimation of context-dependent substitution rates 
by maximum likelihood. Mol Biol Evol 21, 468-88 (2004). 
31. 
Siepel, A. & Haussler, D. Combining phylogenetic and hidden Markov models in 
biosequence analysis. J Comput Biol 11, 413-28 (2004). 
32. 
Batzoglou, S., Pachter, L., Mesirov, J. P., Berger, B. & Lander, E. S. Human and mouse 
gene structure: comparative analysis and application to exon prediction. Genome Res 10, 
950-8 (2000). 
33. 
Korf, I., Flicek, P., Duan, D. & Brent, M. R. Integrating genomic homology into gene 
structure prediction. Bioinformatics 17 Suppl 1, S140-8 (2001). 

34. 
Dewey, C. et al. Accurate identification of novel human genes through simultaneous gene 
prediction in human, mouse, and rat. Genome Res 14, 661-4 (2004). 
35. 
Rinner, O. & Morgenstern, B. AGenDA: gene prediction by comparative sequence 
analysis. In Silico Biol 2, 195-205 (2002). 
36. 
Parra, G. et al. Comparative gene prediction in human and mouse. Genome Res 13, 10817 
(2003). 
37. 
Meyer, I. M. & Durbin, R. Comparative ab initio prediction of gene structures using pair 
HMMs. Bioinformatics 18, 1309-18 (2002). 
38. 
Novichkov, P. S., Gelfand, M. S. & Mironov, A. A. Gene recognition in eukaryotic DNA 
by comparison of genomic sequences. Bioinformatics 17, 1011-8 (2001). 
39. 
Brett, D. et al. EST comparison indicates 38% of human mRNAs contain possible 
alternative splice forms. FEBS Lett 474, 83-6 (2000). 
40. 
Mironov, A. A., Fickett, J. W. & Gelfand, M. S. Frequent alternative splicing of human 
genes. Genome Res 9, 1288-93 (1999). 
41. 
Cawley, S. L. & Pachter, L. HMM sampling and applications to gene finding and 
alternative splicing. Bioinformatics 19 Suppl 2, II36-II41 (2003). 
42. 
Nurtdinov, R. N., Artamonova, II, Mironov, A. A. & Gelfand, M. S. Low conservation of 
alternative splicing patterns in the human and mouse genomes. Hum Mol Genet 12, 131320 
(2003). 
43. 
Goldman, N. & Yang, Z. A codon-based model of nucleotide substitution for protein-
coding DNA sequences. Mol Biol Evol 11, 725-36 (1994). 
44. 
Moore, J. E. & Lake, J. A. Gene structure prediction in syntenic DNA segments. Nucleic 
Acids Res 31, 7271-9 (2003). 

